---
layout: post
title: On Primes
sub_title: And testing for primality
featured_image: /images/prime_sieve.jpg
featured_image_alt_text: Primes
featured_image_title: >
  Proofs that all odd numbers are prime ...
  Physicist: 3 is prime, 5 is prime, 7 is prime, 9 is an experimental error, etc.
  Engineer: 3 is prime, 5 is prime, 7 is prime, 9 is prime, etc.
featured_image_width: 100%
featured_image_link: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sieve_of_Eratosthenes
mathjax: 1
---

A prime number is a positive integer (a natural number) that is only evenly divisible by itself and one.  The number
one itself, by convention, is not considered a prime.  A natural number, greater than one, that is not prime is said
to be composite.

Primes can be considered as the building blocks of all positive numbers.  A statement that is more formally expressesd
by the [fundametal theorem of arithmetic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fundamental_theorem_of_arithmetic) which states
that every natural number, greater than one, is either a prime or can be factorized as a product of primes that is
unique except for their order.

Some interesting questions come to mind ...

1. How many primes are there?
1. How common are primes?
1. How do we determine whether a given number is prime?
1. What is the billionth prime?

I already answered #1 in my post about [proof]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2018-02-12-on-proof %}).  There are
infinitely many.

The distribution of primes within the natural numbers can be statistically modelled.  The
[prime number theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prime_number_theorem) formalizes the intuitive idea that primes
become less common as they become larger and introduces the
[prime counting function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prime-counting_function), $$\pi(N)$$, defined as the number
of prime numbers less than or equal to N.  The use of $$\pi$$ as a function here is unrelated to the number
$$\\pi$$.

The prime number theorem states that ...

$$\pi(n) \sim \frac{n}{\log n}$$

Or more formally ...

$$\lim_{n\to\infty} \frac{\pi(n)}{\frac{n}{\log n}} = 1$$

This means that for large enough N, the probability that a random integer not greater than N is prime is very close to
$$\\frac{1}{\\log N}$$.

# How do we determine that a given number, N, is prime?

Such a test is known as a primality test.

A simple brute force algorithm would be to enumerate all of the natural numbers less than N and see whether any of them
evenly divide N.  If any of them do then N is composite, otherwise it is prime.

Actually, we only have to test potential divisors less than or equal to $$\sqrt N$$.  This is because if N is
composite then at least one of its factors must be less than or equal to $$\sqrt N$$.  To justify this assume that N
is composite and $$N = a \times b$$.  If both $$a$$ and $$b$$ were greater than $$\sqrt N$$ then $$a \times
b$$ would be greater than N.  This is clearly impossible and so at least one of the factors must be $$<= \sqrt N$$.

Ideally we would enumerate only the prime numbers less than N but this presupposes that we know all such primes.  We
can limit the test divisors somewhat by noting that all primes > 3 can be written as $$6n - 1$$ or $$6n + 1$$ for
$$n = 1, 2, ...$$ so so we only have to enumerate test factors of that form.

To see why this is so note that we can enumerate all natural numbers (> 5) as ...

$$6n, 6n+1, 6n+2, 6n+3, 6n+4, 6n+5$$ for $$n = 1, 2, 3, ...$$

The numbers of the form $$6n, 6n+2$$ and $$6n+4$$ are all divisible by 2 and therefore are not prime.  The numbers of
the form $$6n$$ and $$6n+3$$ are all divisible by 3 and therefore are not prime either.  This just leaves those of the
form $$6n+1$$ and $$6n+5$$ as candidate primes.  The $$6n+5$$ numbers are equivalent to $$6n-1$$.

Here's an initial implementation of the brute force primality test in C# ...

``` csharp
namespace PrimeNumbers {
  using System;


  public static class NumberExtentions {
    public bool IsPrime(this ulong number)
    {
      if(number < 2) return false;        // 0 & 1 are not prime
      if(number < 4) return true;         // 2 & 3 are prime
      if(number % 2 == 0) return false;   // 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 24, ... are composite
      if(number % 3 == 0) return false;   // 9, 15, 21, 27, 33, ... are composite

      // Now test for factors of the form 6n - 1 and 6n + 1 for n = 1, 2, 3, ...
      //  6n - 1 : 5,    11,     17,     23,     29, ...
      //  6n + 1 :    7,     13,     19,     25,     31, ...
      // ... up through floor(sqrt(number))

      var max = (ulong)Math.Sqrt(number);

      // We will get here for number = 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 25, 29, 31, 35, ...
      // Those numbers with floor(sqrt(number)) < 5 will not go through this loop at all
      // That's OK though since all of those numbers are prime: 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23

      // 6n - 1 and 6n + 1 for n = 1, 2, 3, ...
      // is equivalent to n and n + 2 for n = 6m + 5 where m = 0, 1, 2, ...
      for(ulong n = 5; n <= max; n += 6) {
        if(number % n == 0) return false;
        if(number % (n + 2) == 0) return false;
      }

      return true;
    }
  }
}
```

We can also leverage known primes.  If N is small then we can simply do a lookup into a list of all known primes up to
some value.

There are also probabilistic methods for testing primality, e.g. the
[Miller-Rabin test](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Miller%E2%80%93Rabin_primality_test).  This sort of method takes the
number to be tested along with a factor indicating the required accuracy.  Methods like this are efficient and useful
when testing very large numbers for primality but for moderately sized numbers their performance lags significantly
behind the exhaustive test methods.

# What is the billionth prime?

Being able to test a given number for primality is one thing but enumerating the primes in sequence is something else.
In order to determine what is the billionth prime we need to generate, and count, prime numbers from 2 up to one
billion.  What's an efficient way to do this?

Well, let's start with brute force and then try to optimize from there.  We'll start by looking for the millionth
prime.

*Method 1*

Loop over all the natural numbers, test each for primality using the above IsPrime function, count the primes and stop
when we get to the millionth one.  Do this all in a single thread.

*Results*

With JIT compiler optimized C# code running on my 2017 MacBook Pro Core i7 @ 2.9GHz this takes, on average, 7.17
seconds to complete and then reports that the millionth prime is $$15,485,863$$.  According to Google that is the
correct answer.

We can do better.  We don't need to test every natural number for primality.  As in the IsPrime test function we can
iterate over the superset of the primes defined by $$6n-1$$ and $$6n+1$$.

*Method 2*

As method 1 but looping over the smaller set of candidate primes.

*Results*

A tiny bit better.  Runtime is now 7.03 seconds on average.  No significant improvement though.

We need a different approach.

# The sieve of Eratosthenes

We will look to a polymath from antiquity for inspiration, a man named
[Eratosthenes of Cyrene](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eratosthenes).  He was a Greek mathematician, geographer, poet,
astronomer and music theorist who ultimately become the chief librarian of the Library at Alexandria.  He is credited
with the invention of a simple simple algorithm for finding all the prime numbers up to any given limit.  This
algorithm is now known as the Sieve of Eratosthenes.

The algorithm iteratively marks as composite the multiples of each number up to a given limit.

*Example: To find all the primes less than or equal to 30*

First list all the natural numbers from 2 to 30 ...

$$2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30$$

The first number in the list is $$2$$.  Go through the list and cross out all the multiples of $$2$$ other than $$2$$
itself..

$$2, 3, \color{lightgrey}{4}, 5, \color{lightgrey}{6}, 7, \color{lightgrey}{8}, 9, \color{lightgrey}{10}, 11,
\color{lightgrey}{12}, 13, \color{lightgrey}{14}, 15, \color{lightgrey}{16}, 17, \color{lightgrey}{18}, 19,
\color{lightgrey}{20}, 21, \color{lightgrey}{22}, 23, \color{lightgrey}{24}, 25, \color{lightgrey}{26}, 27,
\color{lightgrey}{28}, 29, \color{lightgrey}{30}$$

The next uncrossed number in the list is $$3$$.  Go through the list and cross out all the multiples of $$3$$ other
than $$3$$ itself ...

$$2, 3, \color{lightgrey}{4}, 5, \color{lightgrey}{6}, 7, \color{lightgrey}{8}, \color{lightgrey}{9},
\color{lightgrey}{10}, 11, \color{lightgrey}{12}, 13, \color{lightgrey}{14}, \color{lightgrey}{15},
\color{lightgrey}{16}, 17, \color{lightgrey}{18}, 19, \color{lightgrey}{20}, \color{lightgrey}{21},
\color{lightgrey}{22}, 23, \color{lightgrey}{24}, 25, \color{lightgrey}{26}, \color{lightgrey}{27},
\color{lightgrey}{28}, 29, \color{lightgrey}{30}$$

The next uncrossed number in the list is $$5$$.  Go through the list and cross out all the multiples of $$5$$ other
than $$5$$ itself ...

$$2, 3, \color{lightgrey}{4}, 5, \color{lightgrey}{6}, 7, \color{lightgrey}{8}, \color{lightgrey}{9},
\color{lightgrey}{10}, 11, \color{lightgrey}{12}, 13, \color{lightgrey}{14}, \color{lightgrey}{15},
\color{lightgrey}{16}, 17, \color{lightgrey}{18}, 19, \color{lightgrey}{20}, \color{lightgrey}{21},
\color{lightgrey}{22}, 23, \color{lightgrey}{24}, \color{lightgrey}{25}, \color{lightgrey}{26}, \color{lightgrey}{27},
\color{lightgrey}{28}, 29, \color{lightgrey}{30}$$

The next uncrossed number in the list is $$7$$.  Multiples of $$7$$ will result in no more exclusions since all such
numbers have already been crossed out.  We should note that this will be the case as soon as the first uncrossed out
number in a given pass through the array is greater than $$\sqrt{N}$$ where N is the size of the array, $$30$$ in our
example.

Another thing to note is that for each starting number, $$n$$, all the multiples of that number less than the square of
$$n$$ will have already been crossed out, so we can start crossing out multiples of $$n$$ from $$n^2$$.

We can write an implementation of this algorithm in C# ...

``` csharp
namespace PrimeNumbers {
  using System;


  public static class NumberExtentions {
    public void ForEachPrimeUpTo(uint maxNumber, Action<uint> primeFn)
    {
      // Allocate an array of bool to flag whether any of the numbers up through maxNumber
      // are composite
      var numberIsComposite = new bool[maxNumber];

      // We only need to process numbers up to floor(sqrt(maxNumber))
      var maxN = (uint)Math.Sqrt(maxNumber);

      // Starting from 2, 3, ... mark all multiples of n as composite
      uint n = 2;
      for(; n <= maxN; ++n) {
        // If the number has already been marked as composite then skip it
        if(numberIsComposite[n]) continue;
        // Mark all multiples of n in the array as composite starting from n^2
        for(uint m = n * n; m < maxNumber; m += n) numberIsComposite[m] = true;
      }

      // Now walk through the array again and call the callback fn for each prime number
      n = 2;
      for(; n < maxNumber; ++n) {
        if(!numberIsComposite[n]) primeFn(n);
      }
    }
  }
}
```

This will call the callback function, primeFn, for each prime up to and including the number maxNumber.

We can use this algorithm to find the millionth prime.  The only tricky part is that we need to pass in a value for the
largest number to consider.  In other words we need to come up with an estimate for how big the millionth prime will
be.  We will address this limitation in due course but for now let's just get a rough benchmark on the performance of
this strategy.

*Method 3*

Use the Sieve of Eratosthenes with an upper bound of $$15,500,000$$ for the internal array of numbers.  Count the
resulting primes and output the millionth one.

*Results*

With JIT compiler optimized C# code running on my 2017 MacBook Pro Core i7 @ 2.9GHz this takes, on average, 0.13
seconds to complete and then reports that the millionth prime is $$15,485,863$$, which we know to be correct.

Wow!  That's much faster than before.

This implementation has additional scope for improvement as well, in terms of locality of memory access (to improve CPU
L1 and L2 cache access) and also the possibility of mulithreading in order to leverage multiple CPU cores (my MacBook
has 4/8 physical/logical cores).
