---
layout: post
title: On async and await
sub_title: And how it actually works
featured_image: /images/asynchronous_no.png
featured_image_alt_text: Asynchronous No
featured_image_title: "'Kid: Dad?'  'Me: No.'  'Kid: Can I have a new ...?'"
featured_image_width: 400
featured_image_link: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite-state_machine
mathjax: 0
tags: [compsci]
---

# The question

This post is inspired by a question that I was asked recently but couldn't fully answer.  The question was abou the C#
language constructs async and await and how they are actually handled by the C# compiler.  I thought I had a pretty
good idea about this but I struggled to come up with a good explanation.  Clearly I need to clarify my understanding,
and since the best way to really learn something is to teach it to someone else, this post is my attempt to teach it to
you dear reader.  So here we go.

# Synchronous vs asynchronous programming?

Let's start by discussing the nature of synchronous and asynchronous programming.  Synchronous code runs on a single
thread, executing instructions one by one until the program terminates.  When the program calls into library code in
order to do things that involve waiting for external operations to complete (e.g. perform I/O to a device or the
network) then execution blocks until the function call returns.  This can make for an unresponsive program since the
main thread can't do anything else while it is blocked.  Single threaded console applications are examples of such
programs.

GUI programs are different.  They are asynchronous by their very nature and at their core utilize an event loop.  The
main application thread sits in a loop, polling for events and executing code based on the messages that it receives.
Events drive all action in the program.  In this model, a blocking call to an external operation (e.g. disk I/O) will
halt the event loop and make the program unresponsive to user input until the I/O completes.  This used to be a
regular symptom of old Windows UIs until libraries exposed asynchronous APIs for I/O and other wait-based operations.
With an asynchronous API an event handler can initiate I/O and then immediately return to the event loop to process
other events.  When the I/O operation completes an interupt will be fired by the OS which will result in another event
being posted to the app's event loop.  This event will be processed by an event handler just like any other event but
rather than indicating a UI action (e.g. a mouse click) it will indicate the completion of the I/O request.  There is
no explicit blocking wait in the application for the I/O operation.  Rather a request to "start" the I/O operation is
made via a library call, which returns immediately, and then later an event is raised to indicate completion of the
I/O operation.  In the mean time the app's main thread can continue processing events resulting in a responsive UI.

Asynchronous APIs are natural for I/O and other operations that involve waiting for access to an external device.
Other natural operations involve OS timers where code can submit a request to receive a call back (via an event) after
a certain amount of time has elapsed.  But what about activiy that involves the CPU, e.g. performing a long running
calculation.  In a single-threaded application this will invariably require blocking, and an unresponsive UI in the
case of a GUI program.  However, modern OSs support multiple threads of execution and modern computers invariably
have more than one CPU core that can execute code on multiple threads in parallel.  An application can create a new
thread to perform a CPU-intensive calculation without having to block the main app thread.  This can be done explicitly
but some runtime environments provide a "thread pool" of pre-created threads that are ready to perform work on demand.
The .NET CLR is one such environment and there are various APIs to schedule code to run on a thread pool thread
including ways that work just like calls to naturally asynchronous operations like I/O.

# A history of asynchronous APIs in .NET

Asychronous Programming Model (APM)

* Was part of .NET 1.0
* Two methods per operation, BeginOperarionName and EndOperationName


Event-based Asynchronous Pattern (EAP)

* Was introduced in .NET 2.0
* One method to submit an operation and an event to indicate completion


Task-based Asynchronous Pattern (TAP)

* Was introduced in .NET 4.0
* The Task class

Async / await

* Was added with C# 5 and .NET 4.5

``` csharp
public class FooSynchronous
{
  // Synchronous interface
  public int Read(byte[] buffer, int offset, int count);
}

public class Client
{
  public void SomeCode()
  {
    var foo = new FooSynchronous();
    var bytes = new byte[1024];
    for(var n = 0; n < 8; ++n) {
      var bytesRead = foo.Read(bytes, n, 1024);  // No chance to do anything concurrent with the I/O operation ...

      ProcessBytesRead(bytes, bytesRead, n);
    }
  }
}
```

``` csharp
public class FooApm
{
  // APM async interface
  public IAsyncResult BeginRead(byte[] buffer, int offset, int count, AsyncCallback callback, object state);
  public int EndRead(IAsyncResult asyncResult);
}

public class Client
{
  private FooApm _foo = new FooApm();
  private byte[] _bytes = new byte[1024];

  public void SomeCode()
  {
    var callback = new AsyncCallback(ProcessReadResult);
    for(var n = 0; n < 8; ++n) {
      var result = _foo.BeginRead(_bytes, n, 1024, callback, n);
      // Thread is free to perform work concurrent with the I/O operation ...
    }
  }

  public void ProcessReadResult(IAsyncResult result)
  {
    var id = (int)result.AsyncState;
    var bytesRead = _foo.EndRead(result);
    ProcessBytesRead(_bytes, _bytesRead, id);
  }

  public void ProcessBytesRead(byte[] bytes, int bytesRead, int id)
  {
    // ...
  }
}
```

``` csharp
public class FooEap
{
  // EAP async interface
  public void ReadAsync(byte[] buffer, int offset, int count);
  public event ReadCompletedEventHandler ReadCompleted;
}

public class Client
{
  // ...

  public void ProcessBytesRead(byte[] bytes, int bytesRead, int id)
  {
    // ...
  }
}
```

``` csharp
public class FooTap
{
  // TAP async interface
  public Task<int> ReadAsync(byte[] buffer, int offset, int count);
}

public class Client
{
  public void SomeCode()
  {
    var foo = new FooTap();
    var bytes = new byte[1024];
    for(var n = 0; n < 8; ++n) {
      var task = foo.Read(bytes, n, 1024);
      task.ContinueWith(
        t => ProcessBytesRead(bytes, t.Result, n)
      );
      // Thread is free to perform work concurrent with the I/O operation ...
    }
  }

  public void ProcessBytesRead(byte[] bytes, int bytesRead, int id)
  {
    // ...
  }
}
```

``` csharp
public class FooTapAsync
{
  // TAP async interface
  public async Task<int> ReadAsync(byte[] buffer, int offset, int count);
}

public class Client
{
  public void SomeCode()
  {
    var foo = new FooTapAsync();
    var bytes = new byte[1024];
    for(var n = 0; n < 8; ++n) {
      var task = foo.Read(bytes, n, 1024);
      // Thread is free to perform work concurrent with the I/O operation ...
      var bytesRead = await task;
      ProcessBytesRead(bytes, bytesRead, n);
    }
  }

  public void ProcessBytesRead(byte[] bytes, int bytesRead, int id)
  {
    // ...
  }
}

```








# Async / await

Which brings us to async and await.  These are 









# Async / Await

How does it actually work?
